# 2022-02 Release 

# Release Notes

This is the first "formal release" of the IOF Core Ontology that the IOF has made available for public use, and has released as of January of 2023. The focus of the release was primarily to adjust the definitional content of terms to conform with the evolving IOF Annotation Property rules -- the latest version of which is also released herewith. Additionally, the release expands our treatment of measurements and identifiers, and proposes definitional content for terms 'event' and 'state'. Lastly, a key objective was to formalize the infrastructure and processes the IOF uses for managing ontologies in development and during pre- and post-release, and to implement the necessary tooling to automate source code management, testing and deployment.  The new processes, tools and infrastructure have been implemented in this release of Core for the first time and will apply to the all other projects and ontologies the IOF will release in the future. 

##Measurements & Measurement Processes
Several classes and object properties (relations) have been introduced in this release including measurement process, the ability of a thing to be measured, and the resulting measurement results and measurement value expressions (both informational content entity types).  Many of these are at a “provisional maturity” level and will be refined in the forthcoming release, including better alignment with ISO standards prevailing in this topic area.

##Identifiers
Although the term ‘identifier’ and specialized types of it appeared in the draft release of Core earlier in 2022, these terms lacked depth and were not well grounded in use cases. The terms have been relabeled in this release to align with and allow the eventual adoption of the Identifiers Ontology from the OMG Commons Library of Ontologies.  The IOF's adoption of the Identifiers Ontology necessarily involved the adoption of several of its dependent in ontologies, including the Commons Designators, Collections and TextDatatype ontologies. Additionally, as the Commons ontologies are not grounded in a top-level ontology such as the BFO, the Commons ontologies adopted by the IOF needed to be mapped to BFO and equivalence expressions had to be introduced between terms in the Identifiers ontology and those already in Core -- in this release the only overlapping term was 'identifier.' 

The mappings and equivalence expressions are captured in a separate mapping file included in this release. Please note that the extended set of terms appearing in the adopted Commons ontologies are not yet available in stand-alone Core.  The guidance to users of this release desiring to use both terms from the adopted Commons ontologies and Core, is to import both ontologies in their project files and to assert any new domain- or application-specific specialized types of identifiers or designators, etc., from terms in the imported ontologies. Once the Commons ontologies are fully adopted in a future release of Core, the term IRIs and signature from Commons will prevail, and any mapping to BFO and additional annotation properties required by the IOF will simply be appended in Core. 

##Prototype Definitions for Terms Event and State
Terms Event and State have been introduced as primitive terms in this release along with proposed definitional content (axioms). The terms will be further formalized in the coming release along with the introduction of related terms. Please note the maturity of these terms is provisional and both the axioms and the asserted position in the IOF Core/BFO hierarchy may change – or in fact the terms may remain primitive going forward even with further axiomatization. This remains to be decided. The intent behind introducing the terms in this is to solicit feedback and to provide "hook classes" from which more specialized types of events and states can be asserted within the domain-specific ontologies of the IOF.

##Testing & Validation
Testing of this release is limited to a series of automated checks referred to as the Hygiene Tests. For a list of such checks, please consult the Hygiene Test script located here: <<citation needed>>. Logic testing for the release was performed using the HermiT Reasoner and ensuring no errors are generated. Validation of the first-order logic definitions and axiomatization was performed by visual inspection of a "committee of experts" and is not automated at this time.
